.TH ZSHELLCHECK 1 "April 2026" "v1.0.13" "ZShellCheck Manual"
.SH NAME
zshellcheck \- Static analysis tool for Zsh scripts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zshellcheck
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIfile\fR...
.br
.B zshellcheck
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIdirectory\fR...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zshellcheck
is a static analysis tool designed specifically for Zsh scripts. It identifies syntax errors, portability issues, and common anti-patterns that standard shell linters might miss or incorrectly flag.

It parses Zsh scripts into an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) and runs a series of checks (called "Katas") to ensure code quality.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-format \ \fIformat\fR
Specify the output format.
.RS
.TP
.B text
(Default) Human-readable text output with colors.
.TP
.B json
Machine-readable JSON output.
.TP
.B sarif
SARIF 2.1.0 output for GitHub Security integration.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-severity \ \fIlevel\fR
Minimum severity to report: \fBerror\fR, \fBwarning\fR, \fBinfo\fR, or \fBstyle\fR. Default: \fBstyle\fR (all levels).
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI color in the text formatter. Useful for CI logs and file redirects.
.TP
.BR \-\-verbose
Emit additional diagnostic output alongside the results.
.TP
.BR \-version
Print the ZShellCheck version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-help
Display help message and exit.

.SH CONFIGURATION
ZShellCheck merges configuration from the following paths, with the project-local file winning on conflict:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/zshellcheck/config.yml\fR (or \fB.yaml\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB~/.config/zshellcheck/config.yml\fR (or \fB.yaml\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB~/.zshellcheckrc\fR
.IP \(bu 2
\fB./.zshellcheckrc\fR
.RE

All files are YAML.

.SS Example .zshellcheckrc
.nf
disabled_katas:
  - ZC1001
  - ZC1005
.fi

.SS Inline directives
Silence one or more katas from inside a script with a \fB# noka\fR comment:
.nf
rm -rf /tmp/noisy  # noka: ZC1136
rm -rf /tmp/noisy  # noka                   (silences every kata on this line)
rm -rf /tmp/noisy  # noka: ZC1136, ZC1075   (multiple IDs, comma-separated)
.fi
A \fB# noka\fR comment on its own line above code applies to the next code line; placed at the file tail with no code after it, the directive applies file-wide.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Check a single file:
.B zshellcheck script.zsh
.TP
Check multiple files:
.B zshellcheck src/lib.zsh src/main.zsh
.TP
Check a directory recursively:
.B zshellcheck ./src
.TP
Output in JSON format:
.B zshellcheck -format json script.zsh
.TP
Only errors and warnings, no color:
.B zshellcheck --severity warning --no-color script.zsh
.TP
SARIF output for GitHub code-scanning:
.B zshellcheck -format sarif script.zsh

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
No violations found.
.TP
.B 1
Violations found or error occurred.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR zsh (1)
.br
Project Homepage: <https://github.com/afadesigns/zshellcheck>
.br
Full Documentation: <https://github.com/afadesigns/zshellcheck/blob/main/KATAS.md>

.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Fahl (@afadesigns) <github@afadesign.co>.
